All of you are humble people.
If you weren’t,
you would never have been invited to Gilead.
Have you ever noticed, though,
that where humility is concerned,
we do well in some situations
and not so well in others?
For example,
if someone commends us
for a good job
on a talk in the midweek meeting
or perhaps a comment
on the Watchtower  Study,
we give all credit to Jehovah
and to the training we’ve received,
and that’s good.
But in other situations,
we might get into trouble.
In other situations,
our humility might be put to the test.
Now, at Bethel,
as has been mentioned
on this program already,
we all work with people;
we all work closely with others.
Now, some of you sisters work on a team;
you work with others.
And you brothers all have responsibilities
in the congregation
or at Bethel or perhaps both.
But in all situations, humility is needed.
So I thought that this morning
we might consider
what we can learn about humility
from Jehovah God
and from the apostles of Jesus Christ.
Now, humility is a broad term,
so let’s narrow it down a little bit.
Let’s consider a couple
of aspects of humility,
and the first one I’m going to mention
might surprise you.
Insight on the Scriptures
tells us that humility includes
the ability to show mercy
and compassion to others
—the ability to show mercy
and compassion to others—
the ability to make exceptions
where that is warranted.
Well, that’s Jehovah, isn’t it?
Jehovah isn’t rigid.
Jehovah knows when to make exceptions.
How often did you read in the Bible
as you went through
that Jehovah reconsidered?
Jehovah makes perfect rules,
and yet at times he reconsiders.
Now let’s illustrate:
The Israelites are getting ready
to conquer the Promised Land.
And the first up is the city of Jericho.
Now, there’s a rule
—a rule of engagement—
and it’s very clear.
Jehovah says:
“You must not make any covenant with them
nor show them any favor.”
No covenant, no favor
—that’s the rule.
It’s a perfect rule
because it’s Jehovah’s rule.
Joshua sent two spies into the city,
and they went to the home
of a prostitute named Rahab.
Now, wait a minute;
let’s think about that.
Pretty easy to say, isn’t it?
Joshua sent two spies into the city.
They went into a house
of a prostitute named Rahab.
Now, we often think about the faith of Rahab.
But what about the faith of those two spies?
Can you imagine the faith
that it took for those men
(the Bible says they were young men)
to go into that city?
Now, if they were under 40 years of age,
they were born in the wilderness.
How many cities had they ever seen?
Had they ever seen a city before?
How many actual houses had they entered?
How many foreigners had they ever met?
Maybe not very many—maybe a couple
on the other side of the Jordan,
but not very many.
So now, as soon as they enter the city,
what happens?
Someone calls the police.
They’re recognized right away.
And no wonder!
First of all,
they weren’t dressed like Canaanites.
You couldn’t order your clothes
from Amazon in those days, you know.
They were dressed like Israelites.
They probably had on
40-year-old hand-me-downs
from their fathers
who had died in the desert.
So they didn’t look like Canaanites;
they didn’t blend in.
And as soon as they opened their mouth,
people would say:
“You’re not from around here, are you?
You don’t speak the Canaanite language.”
So no wonder they were discovered.
They had to get off the street.
They had to get out of sight.
And you wonder if Jehovah
directed them to Rahab.
You wonder if Jehovah
saw something in Rahab,
something in her heart
that he could work with.
Or do you believe
that it was a coincidence
that the spies were led
to the only family in Jericho
that was worth saving?
It could be that Jehovah
was involved with that.
Well, Rahab decides
that she’s going to hide the spies,
but she has a condition.
And if you’d like to turn
to Joshua chapter 2,
we’ll see what that condition was.
I’ll give you a moment.
We’re going to read Joshua 2:13.
This is Rahab.
Now, we don’t know
how she communicated with them
—must have been a lot of sign language.
We heard about sign language a minute ago.
There must have been
a lot of sign language going on
because the Canaanite language
wasn’t quite like Hebrew, you know.
But anyway,
somehow they got the point across.
And here’s what she says in verse 13:
“You must spare the lives
“of my father and mother,
“my brothers and sisters,
“and all who belong to them,
and you must save us from death.”
What’s she asking for?
She’s asking for an exception.
There’s a rule:
You must not make any covenant with them;
you must not show them any favor.
And she is asking for an exception
—and quite a broad exception.
She is asking not just for her own life
but for the lives of all
of her family members as well.
Some might have thought
that she was pushing it.
But she asked for that.
And the spies showed favor to Rahab.
They made an exception.
And they promised that when the time came,
Rahab and her family would be spared.
The Bible doesn’t criticize the spies
for making that exception.
So it may be that Jehovah
had something to do with it.
Maybe Jehovah moved the spies
in that direction.
Maybe Jehovah saw something in Rahab
that he wanted to save.
Now, later on, Joshua and the elders
didn’t follow instructions,
and they made a covenant
with the Gibeonites.
The Bible does mention that,
but it doesn’t mention this
when it comes to the spies here.
They made the exception.
And we do know
that Jehovah agreed with that exception.
How do we know that?
Because when he made
the walls of Jericho fall,
he preserved the section of the wall
where Rahab’s family lived.
Jehovah agreed to an exception
to his perfect rule.
Now, you know where I’m going with this.
We need rules.
And most of the time,
a rule will satisfy our needs.
But in a few cases,
it only makes sense
to make an exception to the rule.
I’m reminded of the time not too long ago
when the Bethel family moved out of Brooklyn.
Now, there were a lot of Bethelites
in the congregations
who were elders and ministerial servants.
And so a massive reorganization
of congregations
was necessary in New York City.
And the elders and the circuit overseers
had to make sure
that each congregation
had a balanced number of elders,
ministerial servants, and publishers.
And so publishers were assigned
to various congregations.
Can you imagine hundreds of thousands
of assignments that had to be made?
And so there was a rule,
and it was a pretty good rule,
and the rule was:
“Go where you’re assigned.
“We don’t have time
to consider the personal feelings
“about every publisher in New York City,
so please go where you’re assigned.”
That was the rule.
Now, there were two sisters (single sisters)
who were assigned to a congregation.
They didn’t have a car,
and you couldn’t reach
the congregation they were assigned to
by public transportation.
So they were going to have to walk
to the Kingdom Hall,
and the area
where the Kingdom Hall was located
was very dangerous.
Their safety would have been involved.
Well, you had a rule
to go where you were assigned,
but the circuit overseer
lovingly made an exception.
So the point is, we do need rules.
And most of the time,
our rules, even our imperfect rules,
will serve most of the brothers.
But let’s use common sense.
And there are times
when we have to consider an exception.
Now, can you think of anyone who is grateful
that Jehovah made
an exception for Rahab
and that she didn’t die in Jericho?
Can you think of someone?
He was mentioned in this program.
It’s Boaz, the husband of Ruth.
Rahab was his mother.
And think of this:
If Rahab had died in Jericho,
would there ever have been a David?
Let’s go on.
Jehovah directed
that seven nations in Canaan
were to be eliminated,
and the Gibeonites were among them.
But they had a plan.
They pretended to be from a far-off nation
that wasn’t slated for destruction.
And so the elders,
not consulting Jehovah,
made a vow that the Gibeonites
would be spared.
They made a covenant with the Gibeonites.
Well, it wasn’t long,
but what the Israelites realized
is they’d been tricked.
But even though their oath
had been obtained under false pretenses,
they agreed to keep their word.
But it’s what happens next
that’s interesting.
Five kings of the Amorites find out
that the Israelites and the Gibeonites
have made a covenant,
and they are furious.
And so they are determined
to kill all the Gibeonites,
which was really what Jehovah
had intended in the first place.
What did Jehovah do?
He could have said:
‘Well, that solves your problem.
‘You promised the Gibeonites
that you wouldn’t put them to death,
so you can sit back
and let the Amorites do the job.’
But what did Jehovah do?
Joshua 10:8.
Now, remember, he had had a rule.
He’d had a rule
that everyone was to be destroyed.
Joshua 10:8:
“Jehovah then said to Joshua:
“‘Do not be afraid of them,
for I have handed them over to you.
Not one of them will be able
to stand against you.’”
Imagine the humility.
Jehovah helps the Israelites
to keep a promise
that they had no business making.
That is humility.
Well, let’s talk about Jesus’ apostles.
We can really learn humility
from them as well.
Now, we often talk
about the disputes they had,
but mostly that was before Pentecost.
When you think about it,
after Pentecost was a different story.
What do we find out
about the apostles after Pentecost?
Well, they weren’t interested
in taking credit for things,
and they weren’t searching for the limelight.
They were really very self-effacing apostles.
Matthew wrote the first inspired book
—the first inspired history of Jesus Christ.
Do we see Matthew’s picture
on every other page?
Matthew giving a public talk?
Matthew performing a miracle?
Matthew shepherding?
No, his name is only mentioned twice
in the whole Gospel,
and both times
he describes himself as a tax collector
—not a very flattering portrayal.
And what about the apostle John?
The name John appears 23 times
in his Gospel,
but it never refers to the apostle John.
It almost always refers to John the Baptist.
When the apostles and older men met
to consider the matter of circumcision,
was that an important meeting?
Would you agree
that that was a landmark meeting?
The apostles and older men are there.
Who presided?
Who of the 12 was jockeying for position?
James, the brother of Jesus,
wasn’t even an apostle.
He’s the one who presided.
And then later on when the decision was made,
who announced the decision?
Again, James.
You don’t find Peter or John saying:
“Well, you know,
this is a pretty important decision.
We think that one of us should announce it.”
The apostles had learned their lesson.
Well, remember that
when the circuit overseer visits.
You may have
heavy responsibilities at Bethel,
but when he visits a congregation,
he’s in charge that week.
Follow his direction.
Don’t be critical of the circuit overseer,
and don’t be afraid to let him know
how much you appreciate his service.
And you know, our Bethel families
here in the United States
are such a wonderful example of that.
When the circuit overseers
first visit a Bethel congregation,
they’re a little bit nervous
for about ten minutes.
But the Bethel family shows
that they appreciate the counsel so much,
and sometimes they talk
about the circuit overseer’s counsel
for weeks after his visit.
They really deeply appreciate
the visit of the circuit overseer,
and they respect that man.
And we know
that you’re going to do the same.
Humble people are happy to contribute
to the Kingdom work in any way they can,
just so they can contribute.
They’re not hung up on privileges.
They’re not hung up
on prestige or on position.
They don’t seek the limelight.
And in this regard, we’re going to talk
a little bit about the apostle Paul.
Now, Brother Lippold mentioned in his talk
that Paul was not a man to boast,
and that’s quite true.
Actually, Paul was a very humble man.
Now, think about this:
At the time Paul was converted,
about 34 C.E.,
Jesus told Ananias
that Paul was going
to have a wonderful privilege.
Let’s read about it in Acts chapter 9.
Acts 9:15
—Acts 9:15
(and this is Jesus to Ananias):
“But the Lord said to him:
‘Go! because this man
“‘is a chosen vessel to me
“‘to bear my name to the nations
as well as to kings and the sons of Israel.’”
“A chosen vessel.”
How about that!
How did Paul react?
Did he let that go to his head?
Did he immediately go up to Jerusalem
and volunteer to be
on the governing body, saying,
“Well, now that I’m anointed,
I can be on the governing body”?
No.
He stayed where he was in Damascus,
and he kept preaching the good news.
Now, in 36 C.E., he did go up
to world headquarters in Jerusalem.
And how did he react?
Did he say: “Here I am, the chosen vessel.
I’m here to help you run the place”?
He stayed with the apostle Peter
for a couple of weeks.
Apparently, Peter had moved to Jerusalem.
But he kept preaching.
He just put his head to the ground,
and he kept preaching the good news
until one day Jesus appeared to him
when Paul was in the temple.
And he told Paul that he
had to leave Jerusalem immediately
because the Jews were out to kill him.
How did Paul react?
Did he say:
“But the governing body is going to need me.
“If I leave, how will they manage without me?
They need my wisdom”?
Paul obeyed theocratic direction,
and he left.
He accepted a new assignment
—Tarsus.
Tarsus?
What kind of assignment is that
for a chosen vessel?
It was out in the boondocks.
It was 500 miles (800 km)
from the governing body in Jerusalem.
How would the governing body
get to know his wonderful qualities
if he was 500 miles (800 km) from Jerusalem?
Paul went to Tarsus,
and he kept preaching.
We don’t even know
if there was a congregation of Tarsus
when Paul got there.
But Paul kept preaching.
I was thinking of the lovely interview
we just heard
where the brother talked about how he
eventually ended up in the circuit work.
But before that time,
Jehovah gave him a little training.
And perhaps that’s what happened
to the apostle Paul.
Do you know that Paul
may have remained in Tarsus
for eight years preaching?
And then Barnabas came along
11 years after Paul’s conversion.
Barnabas came along
and invited him to Antioch.
And from that time on,
Paul started to have privileges.
And five years after that,
Paul wrote his first inspired letter
that we cherish to this day.
Paul worked hard all his life.
He did more than any of the 12 apostles,
but he was never upset
that he wasn’t counted among them.
Paul appreciated the privileges he had.
He viewed them as undeserved kindness.
And we know that you brothers and sisters
are going to do the same.
You’re invited to conduct
a meeting for field service
—treasure the privilege.
Any privilege that you receive,
treasure it as an expression
of love from Jehovah.
Well, when you go to your assignments,
many situations are going
to test your humility.
And I know that you brothers and sisters
are going to pass the test.
The branch asks you to work on a project,
and deep down
you don’t quite agree with it.
Deep down,
you really wonder if it’s going to work,
and you wonder if it’s not going
to be a waste of your time.
But you’re not going to put it
on the back burner and say,
“Well, I’ll get to it someday if I get time.”
You’re not going to do that.
You’re going to put
heart and soul into the project.
You’re going to pray to Jehovah
to bless the project,
the project that you didn’t quite agree with.
Or if you’re asked
to make a recommendation
and you favor one option over another,
humility is going to move you
to present all of the options,
all of the pros and cons equally.
You’re not going to slant things, thinking:
‘Well, you know, I’m going to have to help
these brothers to make this decision.
‘So I’ll put a really heavy weight
on the pros,
and I’m going to make it really light
on the cons.’
Don’t do that.
I know that you’re going
to present everything honestly,
and you’re going to recognize
that it’s the holy spirit
that helps brothers to make decisions.
Trust the spirit to move the brothers
to do the right thing.
Suppose you sisters
are working on a team
or you brothers are working
on a body of elders.
I know that not even
in your heart of hearts
are you going to think
that you have the best judgment on the team
and that, well, you can listen politely
to the expressions of others
but, really,
yours is the only sensible conclusion,
and you hope that the brothers and sisters
are going to go along with you.
You’re not going to think that,
because nobody is right all the time.
Jehovah’s spirit can work
on any member of the team.
Don’t get discouraged
if every suggestion you make in a meeting
gets shot down.
It happens to the best of us.
And there will be other meetings,
and hopefully some of them
will go better for you.
Don’t get discouraged, and don’t decide:
“Well, I’m not going to say anything anymore.
I’m not going to contribute anymore.”
Be humble and recognize that at times
we may make suggestions
that don’t make very much sense.
I certainly appreciate the kind way
the Governing Body deals with me
with some of my lamebrained suggestions.
In your comments and your assignments
on the midweek meeting,
use the knowledge
you’ve gained at Gilead to build up.
And I know you won’t proofread the meetings.
‘I don’t think that was a good illustration.
‘That scripture wasn’t applied right.
That isn’t the right word.’
You won’t do that.
Just sit back, relax, and enjoy the meetings.
Take in the spiritual food.
Rejoice in whatever the brothers and sisters
have prepared for you.
Well, I haven’t told you anything
you don’t already know.
You’re all humble people.
These are just reminders that all of us need.
All of us are humble most of the time.
We pray for the day
when we’ll be humble all of the time.
And in the meantime,
let’s work on it, you and I.
Let’s work on it together.
Let’s follow the course of humility.
If we do, we’ll continue
to be used by Jehovah.
We love you.
May Jehovah bless you richly.